To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to demonstrate a prolonged cellular state characterised by a reduced level of cytosolic Ca 2+ in neurons elicited by a progressive build‐up of intracellular AS aggregates. The reduced Ca 2+ level is observed in cell models at an early stage of the degenerative process where cells appear unaffected. Quantitatively, it amounts to an approximately 20% reduction in the resting level in primary hippocampal neurons from 150 to 125 nM. Our observation is corroborated by an X‐ray fluorescence study that observed a reduced amount of Ca 2+ in frozen cultured neurons expressing transgenic human AS, albeit this analysis did not allow for specific assignment of the reduced Ca 2+ to cytosol 35 . The apparently unaffected or “healthy” phenotype at this early stage may be the reason for the phase staying unrecognised, but another reason is that studies of AS in relation to Ca 2+ have focussed on dynamic effects like Ca 2+ ‐influx induced by depolarisation or effects of applying extracellular AS on stimulation by neurotransmitters 36 , 37 . The significance of an early degenerative phase was first noted in our OLN cell model 15 , where the expression of certain genes was increased early after induction of AS aggregation, which is where we observe decreased cytosolic Ca 2+ 10 . Silencing one of these genes protected the cells and motivated us to study this phase in more depth 10 . Increases in cytosolic Ca 2+ can be considered a cellular default response to a range of noxious stimuli that compromises the active and coordinated ion transport processes maintaining the steep gradient of Ca 2+ ions across membranes. Such increases are hypothesised to represent pathogenic drivers in a range of neurodegenerative states like AD and PD 38 , 39 . Apart from the study of Ramonet et al, where the cation ATPase, ATP13A2 encoded by PARK9 gene was overexpressed in mouse cortical neurons 40 , reduced cytosolic Ca 2+ for prolonged periods has not been observed in known disease models. However, this can be obtained for limited periods of time by infusion of Ca 2+ chelators, for example BAPTA, through patch pipettes that elicit acute electrophysiological effects 41 , 42 . Increased expression of Ca 2+ ‐binding proteins has been used to lower Ca 2+ levels, but this strategy is not optimal for lowering steady‐state Ca 2+ levels. However, it allows changing of Ca 2+ transients, for example in the study of the effect of glutamate on Ca 2+ ‐dependent genes by nuclear targeting of Ca 2+ ‐buffering parvalbumin 43 . The reduction of cytosolic Ca 2+ by intracellular AS aggregates comes at the cost of energy as Ca 2+ has to be actively transported. Mechanistically, this process can be facilitated by ion exchangers like sodium–Ca 2+ exchanger (NCX) or by Ca 2+ pumps. The low basal cytosolic Ca 2+ level in our models suggests that high‐affinity mechanisms are operating in contrast to low affinity but high‐capacity NCX transporters. Ca 2+ pumps are optimal for this process as they have evolved to fine‐tune cytosolic Ca 2+ levels in the nanomolar range 44 , 45 , 46 . We hypothesised that aggregated AS binds directly to and stimulates the predominant Ca 2+ pumps in the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum, PMCA and SERCA, because total AS levels remain fairly stable in our cell models and the decrease in cytosolic Ca 2+ is prevented by the aggregation inhibitor ASI‐1D. Co‐immunoprecipitation experiments followed by proteomic techniques have demonstrated that PMCA from porcine brain binds both monomer and oligomeric AS 20 . Likewise, SERCA was found to bind AS by pull‐down experiments; however, pronounced selectivity was seen with strong binding of aggregated AS to SERCA in contrast to very low binding of monomeric AS. The interaction seems to rely on specific structural features of SERCA because the Ca 2+ ‐bound E1 state demonstrated stronger interaction with AS than the Ca 2+ ‐free thapsigargin‐stabilised E2 state. During the E1‐E2 transition, the largest structural change in the cytosolic part of SERCA occurs in the actuator domain 47 , 48 , suggesting that this region may be a candidate for binding AS aggregates. The binding of AS oligomers to SERCA resulted in activation of three functional characteristics: Ca 2+ pumping, ATP hydrolysis and SERCA dephosphorylation. This suggests that AS aggregates bind to a defined part of SERCA that promotes its overall functionality. In fact, the actuator domain undergoes major structural rearrangements during the E1P‐E2P‐E2 partial reaction steps involved in dephosphorylation 49 , and this reaction sequence is rate limiting for Ca 2+ pumping and ATP hydrolysis. It is thus plausible that interaction of AS aggregates with the actuator domain activates Ca 2+ pumping and ATP hydrolysis by facilitating the E1P‐E2P‐E2 steps. The existence of protein‐based regulators of SERCA pumps is not unprecedented. Under normal conditions, SERCA activity is inhibited by phospholamban for SERCA1 and ‐2 22 and sarcolipin for SERCA1 in skeletal muscle 50 . In contrast, presenilin‐1 and ‐2 have been shown to activate SERCA2b 51 , linking SERCA activation to Alzheimer's disease. We studied SERCA1a in most biochemical assays. However, to exclude that the AS oligomer interaction with SERCA studied relies on muscle‐specific SERCA properties, we also demonstrated that oligomers stimulate human SERCA1a from microsomes of COS‐1 cells overexpressing human SERCA1a and that they bind to SERCA protein in extracts from mouse and porcine brains as determined by immunoprecipitation. The soluble oligomeric AS aggregates used for binding and functional studies are chemically unmodified 52 in contrast to other in vitro produced oligomers that rely on chemical modifications 53 , 54 . Our oligomers display a folding pattern that differs from insoluble filaments based on HDX‐MS investigations 19 , but share functional properties with amyloid‐type AS filaments like inhibition of 20S proteasomes 21 , binding of aggregate‐specific antibody FILA‐1 55 and stimulations of SERCA activity . To visualise the oligomers, we immobilised them on EM grids immediately upon their elution from the gel filtration column. The oligomers displayed an underlying structure of twisted ribbons with a tendency to form closed and open circular structures with a diameter of around 40 nm. These structures resembled the annular structures formed between wild‐type and A53T mutant AS that display a diameter in the 50 nm range and with regular height fluctuations 56 . Our oligomer preparation displays greater structural resolution than those previously reported 52 , 56 . The reason may be our rapid immobilisation on the EM grid, which contrasts with previous studies where samples were stored at 4°C for varying stretches of time before analysis by TEM and analytical ultracentrifugation 52 , 56 . Low temperatures may adversely affect structural studies of AS oligomers because they dissociate into monomers at 4°C with 15% released after 3 h and 95% after 14 days along with loss of epitopes for conformational‐specific antibody FILA‐1 19 ; and further cooling to −13°C dissociates even stable amyloid AS fibrils 57 . Our well‐characterised oligomer preparation will form a good starting point for generating complexes with purified SERCA for analysis by high‐resolution single particle cryo‐electron microscopy 58 , as such complexes will allow the characterisation of the interphase between the well‐characterised SERCA surface and the active surface of the yet uncharacterised AS oligomers. Insoluble fragments of AS filaments may also be used for such studies because they engage SERCA and activate its ATPase activity, but are easier to generate and are more stable than oligomers. AS oligomers have been proposed to function as pores in biological membranes 59 , 60 , 61 . However, most of these reports are based on studies of artificial phospholipid membranes and use high concentrations of oligomers. We recently demonstrated that our AS oligomer preparation is toxic to OLN‐93 cells when applied at 70 μg/ml 62 . However, only 15% of the cells died within 24 h, indicating the toxicity was not based on formation of non‐specific pores in plasma membranes, but rather caused a stress‐triggering toxic response from within the cell, for example by Ca 2+ entering voltage‐gated Ca 2+ channels 37 . We tested directly if our AS oligomer preparation permeates the microsomes used for the 45 Ca 2+ uptake assay at concentrations of 50 μg/ml and found no increased 45 Ca 2+ efflux from preloaded microsomes treated with oligomers compared to monomers or buffer . We therefore feel confident that the oligomer‐stimulated 45 Ca 2+ uptake is due to SERCA activation. The specific SERCA inhibitor CPA can antagonise SERCA activation and was used to investigate the significance of the reduced cytosolic Ca 2+ . Dose–response experiments demonstrated that chronic treatment with 0.5 μM CPA abrogated the early reduction in cytosolic Ca 2+ observed in cell models and primary neurons and prevented subsequent Ca 2+ increase and ensuing AS aggregation‐dependent cell death. The effective CPA concentration of 0.5 nM was low compared to what is used to induce unfolded protein stress in cell models 63 , 64 , and it was not toxic to our cell models even after treatment for more than 2 weeks. This was expected because low‐dose long‐term pharmacological inhibition of SERCA with thapsigargin that causes a sustained increase in cytosolic Ca 2+ protects against neuronal cell death due to growth factor removal 65 . The prevention of the later phase with increased cytosolic Ca 2+ is surprising because CPA acts by preventing SERCA pumping Ca 2+ from cytosol into ER which should thus favour an increase in cytosolic Ca 2+ . This suggests that the secondary Ca 2+ increase represents a breakdown of compensatory processes leading to an unbalanced influx from Ca 2+ stores, for example enhanced efflux from ER due to sensitisation of ryanodine or inositol‐1,4,5 tris‐phosphate receptors, Ca 2+ channels or from extracellular space via dysregulated Ca 2+ influx channels or exchangers. The protective effect of CPA demonstrates that pivotal degenerative processes are activated during the early phase are amenable to pharmacological intervention. Their nature remains largely unknown but the stress that elicits the cytoprotective NF‐κB AS aggregates 10 is reduced in our OLN model upon inhibition of SERCA by CPA . NF‐κB is increased in PD as determined by accumulation of p65 in midbrain dopaminergic neurons and Lewy body inclusions in PD and DLB 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 and it is also activated by disease‐causing mutations in LRRK‐2 when studied in iPSC‐derived neurons 71 . Inhibiting NF‐κB signalling in c‐REL‐deficient mice induces a late onset parkinsonism also comprising accumulation of aggregated AS 72 and the NF‐κB inhibitor IκBiα is increased early in anterior cingulate in PD 73 like we demonstrate in our cell model 10 . This suggests protective NF‐κB signalling may be of particular importance for the nerve cell populations being vulnerable in PD. The reduced Ca 2+ levels do also directly affect the cellular handling of AS as demonstrated by CPA treatment reducing the interaction between AS aggregates and SERCA by PLA assay and lowering levels of total cellular AS suggesting involvement of chaperone and protein catabolic pathways (Fig 5 E and F). How this mechanistically is carried out is uncertain. Several investigations have studied direct effects of Ca 2+ on AS aggregation in vitro . They demonstrate a proaggregatory effect of increased Ca 2+ levels but often with fluorescently labelled AS proteins 74 and those using non‐modified proteins used high Ca 2+ concentrations 23 because the C‐terminal Ca 2+ ‐binding site in AS has an IC50 around 200 μM) 75 . However, changed Ca 2+ levels have potential for affecting a range of pathways regulating intracellular AS levels and specific candidates for rescue by CPA treatment are chaperone‐mediated autophagy 76 , USP‐19‐dependent excretion of aggregated AS 77 and changed gene expression regulating cytoprotective so‐called neuroprotective shield genes that depend on nuclear Ca 2+ concentration 43 . The neuroprotective effect of CPA against AS aggregate toxicity and thapsigargin against growth factor withdrawal‐dependent neuron death 65 demonstrates that SERCA represents a potentially neuroprotective target, but its ubiquitous expression raises concerns regarding adverse effects in other organ systems. However, there is precedence for targeting ubiquitously expressed ion transporting ATPases as exemplified by the cardiotonic steroids targeting Na‐K‐ATPase, which is used in congestive heart failure with a narrow therapeutic window 78 , 79 . Importantly, structural studies of the interaction between AS aggregates and SERCA may allow identification of compounds that block this abnormal interaction. In principle, such compounds could target surfaces of the AS aggregate. Although the active surfaces of AS aggregates are unknown, we show that AS requires C‐terminal 45 residues in its monomeric building blocks as demonstrated by absent stimulatory activity of filaments formed by C‐terminally truncated AS‐1‐95. This is analogous to what was required to exhibit increased AS aggregate affinity towards p25α protein 21 . This highly negatively charged and proline‐rich region of AS has never been resolved in structural studies and the recently described Greek‐key type beta‐sheet domain resolved in AS filaments terminated around residue 98 80 , so it remains unknown how it contributes to aggregate‐dependent functions. Rather than targeting SERCA and AS aggregates, more tractable down‐stream targets may be uncovered by studying the degenerative signalling pathways activated during the early low‐Ca 2+ phase, for example protective nuclear NFkB translocation that is attenuated upon CPA treatment . Such AS aggregate‐dependent dysfunctions may radiate from the endoplasmic reticulum, as this organelle contributes to a multitude of cellular functions including protein sorting, unfolded protein response, excretion of misfolded cytosolic proteins during proteasomal stress, uptake of Ca 2+ via store‐operated Ca 2+ entry from the plasma membrane and Ca 2+ loading into mitochondria via mitochondria‐associated membranes (MAMS) 81 . The endoplasmic reticulum permeates all neuronal compartments from pre‐ to post‐synaptic structures, and AS aggregates appear to have a preference for targeting endoplasmic reticulum in AS‐transgenic mouse and PD brain tissue 17 . The SERCA affinity of oligomers can represent one mechanism whereby they become concentrated at the ER surface, and the activation of its Ca 2+ transporting activity can affect ER functions including protein folding and Ca 2+ signalling, for example via ligand‐gated ryanodine or inositol‐1,4,5 tris‐phosphate Ca 2+ channels. We demonstrate the SERCA activator XCT 790 qualitatively can mimic the AS aggregate effect by first causing a reduction in cytosolic Ca 2+ that subsequently is followed by an increased Ca 2+ level that likely reflects a breakdown of compensatory mechanisms . Although the biphasic process caused by 10 μM XCT 790 is accelerated, does it suggest that studies of cellular responses to SERCA activators may be used to disentangle the complex response induced by intracellular AS aggregates and which may arise from several AS aggregate‐induced dysfunctions, for example caused by low Ca 2+ stress, ER overload stress, mitochondrial stress and dysfunctional autophagy. The duration of the period where a neuron encounters reduced average cytosolic Ca 2+ will likely influence its contribution to the symptomatology of synucleinopathies where the effect of neuronal dysfunction on circuitries may differ from a frank loss of the cell. In the non‐mitotic SH‐SY5Y model, cells exhibit progressive degeneration where approximately 30% of the cells are lost after 14 days in accordance with previous reports 13 . These cells experienced reduced Ca 2+ for 6 days of the 2 weeks period, which is a significant part of these non‐mitotic cells’ life span. According to the Braak hypothesis of prion‐like spreading of misfolded AS cytopathology, individual neurons likely encounter a gradual build‐up of pathogenic AS species that may last for years before the cells ultimately die. In this process, they may have passed on prion‐like AS species to connected neurons and contributed to symptomatology by changing circuitry properties that are modulated by low cytosolic Ca 2+ . The hypothesis of prion‐like spreading of AS cytopathology in the nervous system posits that small amounts of misfolded AS seeds are released from donor cells and taken up in recipient cells. Here, they start a process of templated aggregation of the native AS that would result in a gradual build‐up of intracellular aggregates that may span from early oligomeric species to mature amyloid‐type fibrils. The time‐course for this build‐up is unknown, but it can be obtained in transgenic mouse models by inoculation of preformed fibrils or brain extracts from diseased animals, which initiate a neurodegenerative process that traverse several neurons within months 82 . In humans, the process is expected to be much slower. In relation to the Braak staging of PD, RBD is hypothesised as representing early manifestation with LB development in brainstem regions preceding the spread to midbrain dopaminergic neurons where actual parkinsonism evolve 83 . More than 70% of RBD patients develop PD within 7 years, which suggests that migration of symptom‐causing misfolded AS species from the lower brainstem to the midbrain can take several years. To investigate the hypothesis that AS aggregate‐dependent effects on SERCA may occur in brain regions not commonly recognised as affected by Lewy body pathology, we studied the frontal cortex from a DLB patient and occipital cortex from an age‐matched control using the AS‐SERCA PLA assay. Figure 7 A and B demonstrates nearly absent signals in the controls brain suggesting no interactions between SERCA and AS aggregates are taking place. By contrast, the DBL brain exhibits strongly increased signal in terms of area covered with PLA signal and intensity of the signals. This strongly corroborates our hypothesis that interactions between SERCA and AS aggregates develop in tissue from patient affected by synucleinopathies. Our data merely serve as proof of concept, but will justify proper clinical studies of selected brain regions from larger patient cohorts affected by different synucleinopathies. The large microheterogeneity observed in the AS‐SERCA PLA signal on the stained tissue section calls for further studies in affected cell types and their relation to putative structural differences and tissue responses like neuroinflammation . To further substantiate the interaction between aggregated AS species and SERCA, we analysed the extracts from the cerebellar dentate nucleus from three MSA patients and three controls. The tissue was subjected to differential extraction to investigate if the normally detergent‐soluble SERCA in the MSA cases will co‐fractionate with the detergent‐insoluble AS aggregates. Figure 7 C demonstrates the presence of detergent‐insoluble AS in the MSA cases in contrast to the controls and SERCA cosediment with the insoluble AS aggregates. To further describe the relation between aggregated AS and SERCA within the AS fibrils intracellular inclusions, we isolated Lewy bodies from patients affected by PD and DLB and also GCI from a patient affected by MSA. SERCA was preferentially present in the core of the brainstem‐type Lewy bodies from the PD patient whereas it was more diffusely distributed along with the fibrillar AS in the less well organised DLB‐type Lewy bodies and the GCI. In the inclusions, SERCA colocalised with the ER marker, Grp78, suggesting ER structures may be trapped in the inclusions, which may contribute to ER dysfunctions. How may these experimental findings reconcile with first previous epidemiological and genetic data on protective effects against PD by L‐type Ca 2+ channel antagonists 2 , 3 and second the pathoanatomical data on selective vulnerability of neuronal populations in PD that in substantia nigra pars compacta neurons exhibit large Ca 2+ driven by L‐type Ca 2+ channels 84 , 85 ? First, it should be kept in mind that both the early phase with reduced cytosolic Ca 2+ and the following phase with increased Ca 2+ both are inhibited by inhibiting SERCA with CPA. Hence, treatment strategies targeting the high Ca 2+ phase may still contribute some cellular relief despite not targeting the underlying mechanism. The largest epidemiological study confirmed a protective effect of ongoing treatment with L‐type Ca 2+ channel antagonists but there was no effect of past use, which made the authors suggest the effect could represent a symptomatic relief rather than a true disease modification 3 . In our proposed paradigm of a biphasic basal Ca 2+ change in neurons experiencing a build‐up of AS aggregates, L‐type Ca 2+ channel antagonists may retard or attenuate the second phase with increased cytosolic Ca 2+ that is associated with development of cell death. An action on the early phase can also be envisioned if expression of CaV1.3 channels partly is regulated by negative feedback from average cytosolic calcium levels. The increased levels of CaV1.3 antigen and mRNA in cortical tissue with no Lewy body pathology from early PD patients 4 , 5 could represent a response to soluble AS oligomers activating SERCA and reducing average Ca 2+ in neurons not exhibiting spontaneous pace making changes in Ca 2+ as in dopaminergic neurons of substantia nigra pars compacta. The ongoing clinical study of early PD patients treated with L‐type Ca channel antagonist isradipine may inform about these issues in the near future (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02168842 ). The selective vulnerability of neuronal populations lost in PD has allowed certain characteristics of these neurons to be proposed 84 . Areas affected by Lewy body pathology and substantial neuron loss in PD can be exemplified by substantia nigra pars compacta, locus coeruleus, median raphe nucleus. These neuronal populations display diffuse axonal projections and often possess very large numbers of presynaptic terminals 84 . AS is a protein that normally resides in presynapses in high concentrations and its aggregation process is concentration dependent. This makes presynapses likely to be the first sites to experience the build‐up of AS aggregates, as supported by proteinase K blotting experiments on cortical tissue affected by dementia with Lewy bodies 86 , that secondarily will activate SERCA, increase ATP consumption and reduce cytosolic calcium levels at these sites. A local aggregatory process in terminals may spread within the terminal field of individual neurons as AS readily disperses between terminals of single neurons in a process affected by neuronal activity 87 . The engagement of SERCA pumps in the large terminal fields of vulnerable neurons will increase ATP consumption putting a stress on their mitochondria and the potentially increase oxidative stress. This process be further complicated because the reduced average cytosolic Ca 2+ may compromise activity‐dependent calcium loading into mitochondria thereby compromising their oxidative phosphorylation 88 . When aggregation increases and AS aggregates are transported from terminals into axons and cell bodies then different mechanisms may come into play caused by the SERCA activation both due to lowered calcium, for example in the nucleus 89 and potentially also ER Ca 2+ overload if not relieved by overload channels 90 . How these mechanisms driven by a reduced average cytosolic Ca 2+ interacts with cell type‐specific effects in vulnerable substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons will have to be tested? They may affect the Ca 2+ ‐induced Ca 2+ ‐release from ER facilitated by the oscillating in Ca 2+ driven by the L‐type Ca 2+ channels and thereby the well‐described filling of Ca 2+ into mitochondria 91 . However, the recently described ER overload channel TMCO1 may well add another layer of complexity in conditions where SERCA activation will cause Ca 2+ overload in ER 90 . However, irrespective of vulnerable areas in PD it should be kept in mind that AS aggregate pathology has potential to affects brain cells on a broader scale. This has been demonstrated by the clinical studies of families with triplications in the SNCA gene that express increased levels of normal AS protein as reviewed 92 . These families often presented with parkinsonism caused by degeneration of the vulnerable substantia nigra pars compacta but often displayed dementia and other non‐motor symptoms at the time of diagnosis or shortly after. This was due to widespread accumulation of aggregated AS in neurons but also glial cells. Conclusively our demonstration of AS aggregates activating SERCA and causing dysregulation of cytosolic Ca 2+ holds potential for affecting the above‐described PD‐associated mechanisms apart from yet undescribed neuronal functions that potentially are tractable (Fig 8 ). The specific nature of such dysfunctions, their signalling pathways and brain regions affected in the different synucleinopathies merits further investigations.