The small unfolded neuronal protein α‐synuclein (AS) is closely linked to Parkinson's disease (PD). This is evidenced by the findings that autosomal‐dominant familial PD can be caused by duplications and triplications of the normal SNCA gene encoding AS, by missense mutations causing exchange of single‐amino acid residues (A30P, E46K, H50Q, G51D and A53T, A53E), and by variations in the SNCA gene, which represents the greatest genetic risk factor for sporadic PD. Aggregated amyloid‐type fibrillar forms of AS accumulate in intra‐neuronal Lewy body inclusions, which are the pathological hallmark of PD. Similar AS‐containing intracellular inclusions also exist in other neurodegenerative diseases, so‐called α‐synucleinopathies, that besides PD are dominated by dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and multiple system atrophy (MSA). On the pathway from native protein to aggregated amyloid species, soluble oligomeric species are hypothesised to represent cytotoxic forms. The molecular mechanisms whereby AS aggregates contribute to the degeneration of neuronal populations are still unclear, but it has been proposed that they may be linked to perturbations of homeostatic mechanisms, for example proteostasis, mitochondrial functions, and direct toxic actions on membranes (reviewed in 1 ). Disturbances in brain Ca 2+ regulation have recently been linked to PD because treatment of hypertension with antagonists of L‐type Ca 2+ CaV1 channels reduces the risk of PD 2 , 3 , 4 and the expression of CaV channels in the brain is changed in PD 4 , 5 . Average cytosolic Ca 2+ concentrations are kept in the nM range, contrasting with the mM concentrations present outside cells and in the endoplasmic reticulum. The steep gradient makes Ca 2+ an ideal signalling molecule because its cytosolic concentrations can be regulated precisely with spatio‐temporal precision by opening of Ca 2+ channels. Once in the cytosol, Ca 2+ has to be removed by active transporting pumps in ER, Golgi and the plasma membrane, by Na + /Ca 2+ exchanger in the plasma membrane, and by mitochondrial buffering. The mechanism whereby Ca 2+ channel antagonists modulate the disease course of PD is still unknown, but it is hypothesised that the mechanism reduces the oxidant stress of dopaminergic neurons of substantia nigra that display an energy‐consuming pacemaking firing pattern driven by Ca 2+ influx via CaV1 channels 6 . How this localised effect in dopaminergic neurons is related to the progressive nature of PD remains unclear, but recent data indicate a complex interplay between AS, cytosolic Ca 2+ and CaV1 channels in dopaminergic substantia nigra neurons 7 . Braak hypothesised that PD arises in the deep brainstem nuclei and spreads via the midbrain to neocortical regions 8 . This spreading pattern can be clinically observed in some patients, where REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) represents a prodromal phase of PD, and most PD patients develop cognitive impairment and dementia in their later phases due to involvement of neocortex. Ca 2+ deregulation has also been hypothesised as playing a general role in several neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease. In these diseases, increased cytosolic Ca 2+ represents a common theme which suggests the presence of mechanisms that lead to the influx of Ca 2+ from extracellular space, endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria as targets for therapeutic intervention 9 . We have previously demonstrated that AS aggregate‐dependent degenerative processes are initiated at very early time points in cell models when no overt phenotypes are present 10 . In the present study, we investigated the temporal development of changes in cytosolic Ca 2+ in cellular and neuronal models of AS aggregate‐dependent degeneration. Surprisingly, we observed early reduction in cytosolic Ca 2+ across models. This reduction was later followed by increased cytosolic Ca 2+ when degeneration became apparent. Inhibitors of AS aggregation blocked both the early and late Ca 2+ changes. This suggests activation of mechanisms whereby cytosolic Ca 2+ is removed against large gradients. Co‐immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that soluble and insoluble AS aggregates bind to the Ca 2+ pump SERCA in contrast to monomers. SERCA is located in the endoplasmic reticulum. Their interaction was validated in cells using proximity ligation assays (PLA) where the antibody pair against SERCA and AS only produced a signal when the aggregation was not prevented. In vitro biochemical experiments demonstrate that AS aggregates activate the transmembrane Ca 2+ pumping and ATP hydrolysis by SERCA. Counteracting the activation of SERCA in cells with the SERCA inhibitor cyclopiazonic acid (CPA) abrogated both the early reduction and later increase in cytosolic Ca 2+ and protected cells and neurons against AS aggregate‐dependent cell death. Treatment of AS‐transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans with CPA protected the dopaminergic neurons against AS‐dependent degeneration. Analyses of human brains by proximity ligation assay demonstrated the interaction between SERCA and aggregated AS in patients with DLB but not in controls. Moreover, SERCA was present in purified Lewy bodies from DLB patients and in glial cytoplasmic inclusions from MSA patients and SERCA copurified with insoluble AS in the detergent‐insoluble fraction of MSA brain. We hypothesise that a slow build‐up of AS aggregates occurs within individual neurons during the process of disease spreading throughout the nervous system. We posit that the accumulating aggregates in the early stages activate SERCA and cause a reduction in cytosolic Ca 2+ , triggering decisive pathophysiological changes and leading to ensuing cell death (Fig 8 ). Counteracting this early phase or its down‐stream processes holds promise for increasing the vitality of the affected cells, thereby slowing and modifying the disease course. AS aggregates bind and stimulate the active SERCA‐mediated transport of cytosolic Ca 2+ into the endoplasmic reticulum. During the building‐up process of cytosolic AS aggregates, the stimulation of SERCA causes an early reduction in cytosolic Ca 2+ , increased ER Ca 2+ that could lead to increased mitochondrial Ca 2+ . The dysregulated Ca 2+ perturbs Ca 2+ ‐dependent processes, leading to progressive neuronal dysfunctions. Ultimately, compensatory mechanisms fail, whereafter cytosolic Ca 2+ rise and the neurons die. Inhibition of AS aggregation by the inhibitor ASI‐1D and reducing the activity of SERCA by its inhibitor CPA counteracts the Ca 2+ dysregulation and protect the neurons.